Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane. British-born author James P. Hogan has gained a reputation
as one of the premier writers of hard science fiction working today.
He's published seven novels so far, including In Here at the Stars, The Gentle Giants of
Giant Star, Thrice Upon a Time, The Two Faces of Tomorrow, and his latest voyage from yesteryear.
Hogan tells us how he became an author.
When I left school when I was 16 and wanted to be a writer then, I guess it was something that I
always enjoyed doing as a kid at school. In the essays and the story writing exercises you get.
And when I left school I told the world I was going to be a writer.
And it seemed a good idea until somebody said, well, with all the accumulated wisdom and experience
of 16 years, what are you going to write about that the world is breathlessly waiting to hear?
And I hadn't thought about that and the answer was not a lot.
So I went away into engineering and electronics and computers and things like that for something like
20 years. And I suppose the interest in writing probably never went away.
For 20 years, Hogan worked as a systems designer for computers and sold computers to scientists
for use in their research.
Associating with scientists as he did, Hogan was exposed to all sorts of current scientific
research and he would make use of his scientific contacts when he began to write seriously.
I made use of my customers pretty freely as consultants, which was kind of handy.
I found that I had customers who were brain surgeons and other customers who were studied pieces of
rock brought back from the Apollo missions and other guys who were building in or investigating
machine intelligence. And just about any of the topics or the favorite themes of science fiction
that you could take out of a hat, the chances were sort of not 10 to 1. I had a customer
specializing in that field and I just had to, if I needed some background information on a
particular topic, I could almost guarantee I had a phone number in my diary as a guy who could
talk all day about it. And they love doing it as well. I used to call them and they like to come
and talk to you tomorrow. Well, we're a little busy, but what's it about? Oh, I need some help with
the book I'm working on. Well, why didn't you say so? What times do you want to show up? And they
talk all day. I think this is one of the interesting sites of selling computers into
this kind of area. You can imagine some of these specialists, they talk to bacteria all day long
or whatever and they end up shutting the back rooms of universities. And maybe there are four
people on the planet they can talk to who understand their language. And sometimes they find it hard
to believe that somebody from the world outside that has walked in off the street is sincerely
interested to sit down and talk to them and is curious and he wants to know what they're doing,
wants to have it explained. So writing about his experiences with scientists,
Hogan found that he was a science fiction writer. I didn't particularly set out to be a science
fiction writer. I suppose I became one by accident. I just always wanted to write and started writing
stories about the little bit of life that I'd had some personal experience of and was told I was a
science fiction writer and I said, how's that? They said, well, the publisher is publishing it under
their science fiction influence. So we guess you have to be so I said, okay. And it kind of started
out like that. Hogan's books are scientifically accurate and highly realistic. He's been called
The Man Who Put Science Back into Science Fiction. Next time we'll talk to James P. Hogan about some
of his novels. This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show. So stay with us.
You
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. James P. Hogan's 1977 science fiction novel,
Inherit the Stars, should be required reading for anyone who demands scientific accuracy in
an exciting narrative. The book takes place some 50 years in the future. A skeleton inside a spacesuit
is found on the moon. That's interesting enough. But what follows is even more provocative. The
skeleton is a human one and it's been on the moon for 50,000 years. The scientific unraveling of this
mystery forms the basis of the novel. It's like a detective story and Hogan talks about the origins
of the idea. 2001 was one of the factors that inspired me to write Inherit the Stars. I love the
idea of something being found, a mystery being uncovered in the course of lunar exploration
that was sufficiently intriguing to motivate a lot of scientists into unraveling it.
It seemed a good opportunity to set the scientific detective story that I wanted to write.
You know, okay, let's have the detective story or the mystery that the detectives are trying to
solve hinge around something that's turned up on the moon. Well, dead bodies are always pretty good
for detective stories. It ought to be a more interesting dead body than the standard detective
thriller. So let's make it 50,000 years old and human, which raises the whole, opens up the whole
bag of worms. And let's just see how they unravel that. And I wanted the ending to be
a bit of a twist, a bit unexpected, a bit of a surprise, but nevertheless plausible and
rational within the context of the story. I didn't want to bring in mystical agencies or
strange laws of physics or anything like this to hold it together.
The entire scientific community of Earth starts to work on the baffling problem of the
space-suited 50,000 year old human skeleton, which they name Charlie. They soon find remnants on the
moon of Charlie's culture, a map of an unfamiliar planet, scraps of Charlie's diary in an unfamiliar
language, and some technological artifacts. With such clues, the scientists begin to piece
together the incredible story of who Charlie was and why he was human. Hogan says the book sort of
defines what science is all about. It counters some of the distorted images of scientists Hogan has
seen in fiction. Scientists were always eccentric and they wore odd colored shoes and they drew
cabbages that ate people and they wanted to conquer the world or something. And there are these
kind of cute public impressions of scientists as people who run down the street with no clothes
on shouting Eureka. Or you read phrases like it came to him in a flash and you read on and
what came to him in a flash would have been enough to keep Einstein busy for the next 20 years.
And real science, you know, there are insights, there are strokes of genius, but the overwhelming
bulk of the work is done by a lot of unsung heroes, a lot of people doing nothing really
dramatic or exciting, but just meticulously sifting through details, collecting information.
For generations and for centuries, all different parts of the world. And it's really like putting
together a huge jigsaw puzzle, lots of people cutting out pieces and pushing them around and
every now and again somebody will take a huge chunk in this corner and see that it fits with a huge
chunk down there and that's a breakthrough. And so it goes on. And it really is a detective story.
I think it's a far more exciting one than most detective fiction.
We strongly recommend you read Inherit the Stars to find out the solution to the mystery
surrounding Charlie. Hogan wrote two sequels to Inherit the Stars and all three form a trilogy
that presents an awesome view of man's origins. Next time we'll talk with Hogan about those other two books.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane. James P. Hogan's science fiction novel Inherit the Stars
was popular enough with readers to justify a sequel, two of them in fact.
The first was entitled A Gentle Giant's of Ganymede and was published in 1978.
Hogan explains why he wrote the book.
When I wrote Inherit the Stars I had three books in mind. I had a trilogy in mind.
So I put the hooks in, although Inherit the Stars was a complete story in itself,
you know, it didn't leave anything, it didn't leave the reader hanging. It told and it started
and told and finished a story. Nevertheless, there were a couple of hooks in there that invited
some questions, which sort of paved the way to a follow-up book. And my thinking at the time was,
I'll go that far, but I won't write the second book until I have some feedback as to how the
readers liked the first one. And I got a lot of mail and they all liked it and a lot of them
said in their letters, will there be a follow-up? They picked out the hooks. So I wrote The Gentle
Giants. The Gentle Giants of the title are a race of aliens that first turned up in Inherit the
Stars. In that book, scientists from Earth had discovered a wrecked spaceship on Ganymede,
one of Jupiter's huge moons. And on it were the remains of prehistoric creatures from Earth,
dinosaurs and the like. In The Gentle Giants of Ganymede, humans meet some live Ganymians who
have returned to the solar system after a mishap in space kept them away for some 25 million years
due to time dilation. It turns out that the Ganymians had been responsible for human evolution.
They'd taken primitive hominids from Earth 25 million years ago and moved them to a planet
called Minerva. Minerva was then one of the inner planets of our solar system, but it was destroyed
in a tremendous war involving the human stock that had evolved from the Ganymian experiments.
The second book ends with the Ganymians leaving the solar system in search of their own people,
who migrated from Minerva millions of years before the war that destroyed the planet.
Hogan says readers wanted a third book.
And they wanted another one and I did have a trilogy in mind when I wrote it. And the third one
in that series is now written. It's called Giant Star and it will be, it's a July title,
so it should start to appear in the bookstores around June. It's the third and last, it won't be
any more in that series. So it ties up a few of the loose ends, tells another story,
continues with the characters we met in the previous two books, both the terrestrial and the
one.
Giant Star was published in 1981 and as Hogan said, it wraps up all the mysteries and loose ends
raised in the first two books. And it presents an absolutely breathtaking concept of man's origins,
explaining also where man gets his curious nature, his aggressiveness, and his incredible
instinct for survival. Hogan talks about the underlying purpose of the whole trilogy.
Basically it was an attempt to depict science as it is, or at least as I perceive it.
And at the same time weave that into a story that people who were non-scientists, non-specialists,
would find stimulating and arousing for the curiosity, even if
without trying to turn it into a 250-page lab report or something like that.
And stimulating the books certainly are. For sheer grandeur, the whole Minervan trilogy,
as some have called it, is matched by a few other works in the field of science fiction.
Isaac Asimov's Foundation trilogy comes to mind as a comparison, as does Olaf Stapleton's Arjan.
James B. Hogan's Inherit the Stars, The General Giants of Ganymede, and Giant Star.
Contemporary science fiction has little to offer that's any better.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson.
Time travel is one of the traditional themes of science fiction.
One of the best, certainly one of the most realistic time travel books,
is James Hogan's Thrice Upon a Time, which came out in 1980.
But for some time, for a number of years, in fact, before I wrote Thrice Upon a Time,
I'd been wanting to write a time travel book for a number of reasons.
Firstly, I wanted to attempt to face up to the paradoxes, the logical paradoxes,
once and for all, and answer them without top-outs, without convenient coincidences,
and without obliging characters who just happen to do the right thing to make everything come out
the way the author said. And secondly, I wanted to get away from this kind of cliche of some kind
of a conjurer's box, described or described as whatever, that you jump into and you jump out of
and you're in some other time. We seem too many conjurer's boxes, and it seemed to me unrealistic
if I ever built a box like that and I thought it was going to take me to another time,
I certainly would jump into it and press the button. It would conduct a long series of tests
and experiments first, and none of that here I was ever thinking to do this.
Hogan wanted to avoid some of the cliches or formulas that characterized most time travel stories.
I think in too many stories, time machines are used like Starships, they're just a device,
a vehicle, to get some characters into an unusual environment, and then tell a pretty routine story
that would stole them from Greek mythology or European medieval history, and the technology
doesn't come into the story at all, they could have gone the on a greyhound bus. I didn't want to
do that, and so the story was about some physicists who had stumbled upon this phenomenon and had
realized that if what they were seeing meant what they thought it meant, it meant that they could
actually inject information into the past and change the past with all the questions that
implied, and being proceeded to test this phenomenon and the pains and very very strange results.
The strange thing the physicists learn is that they can send messages into the past,
not far into the past, maybe just 10 minutes. I didn't want it to be a million years or a billion
years or some huge span of time where really nothing that you did could make any difference.
How about a lab bench experiment, 10 minutes? Now you can just send a little signal back to
yourself 10 minutes ago and change what you've already done. This is interesting, you're hard
up against the paradoxes now, you can't find a way around them or duck them, you've got to
answer the question what happened. The logic of the whole situation becomes absolutely,
it's likely to the point of insanity trying to figure it out.
It was the logic and the science implied by the time travel theme that fascinated Hogan.
He wanted to approach the concept realistically. And it's so realistic that you feel after reading
the book you could go down to Radio Shack and buy the parts to make a time travel machine.
Recently a number of responsible scientists have been speculating on the actual possibility of
time travel. We asked Hogan if he thought it would ever be a reality and if his book was meant to be
prophetic. Well I don't know whether it's prophetic or not. Well as is elaborated in the book itself
if something like that ever became a fact there are some pretty interesting problems
that are going to have to be solved and our ideas of logic and cause and effect are going to have
to undergo some pretty interesting revisions. So I'm certainly not setting myself up as a
prophet saying yes it'll happen. Maybe I don't know I think history has shown that impossible
or it'll never happen are very dangerous phrases to use in any context.
Morals James P. Hogan next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane. Of all science fiction writers working today
no one surpasses James P. Hogan in scientific accuracy and realism. Hogan's publisher
Ballantine Books has advertised him as the man who put science back in science fiction.
And after reading books like Thrice Upon a Time and The Two Faces of Tomorrow you realize how
much he deserves that description. Hogan is also concerned with realism with the kind of
everyday detail that makes his story even though it's set in the future a totally believable one.
He explains why realistic detail is important. I think these kinds of details do matter because
if we are if we're putting a story into a futuristic setting I think the
little details of background such as if the guy needs to make a phone tour how does he go about
it if he needs to render CAD these matter because if the story is being told in the future the whole
back the whole of the background has to be consistently futuristic. I've come across a number
of instances which are in my opinion a little flawed because uh spelt with an AW.
But a writer may have seized on a particular thought maybe a new scientific idea or a machine
or whatever. Develops that very well but kind of gets hung up on it and in the background
everything else that's going on hasn't changed since 1980.
And trying to I think just stop typing for the five minutes it takes just to think about a
situation the guy's going to make a phone call just like stop and think how he might make that
and think about it for five minutes and then maybe show it in a way different to what would
have been the positive thing to do in the first couple of seconds.
Hogan says that his readers appreciate his attention to realistic detail and accuracy.
In fact he thinks he attracts some readers who don't normally read science fiction because of it.
From the people who who write to me and the people that I meet
one of the gratifying things I observe in the readership that I have is that very
it is not confined to what might be termed the hardcore science fiction reader who buys
anything new that appears on the science fiction section of the bookstores. But a lot of I suppose
people who might be termed younger professional people in their late 20s 30s 40s in all manner
of professions not necessarily to do with the scientists teachers lawyers doctors so forth
who typically would say gee I haven't I used to read science fiction when I was at college or
when I was at university but I kind of grew out of it. I can't relate to the way out galaxies
like years away anymore or aliens running around with ray guns. Today I have a family
of career of mortgage my feet are solidly on the surface of this planet but they seem to like stories
that don't kind of try and take them to the other side of the universe a million years from now but
maybe just stretch the future 20 or 30 years. They may find names in the book like IBM and
Avis and Boeing familiar places and it kind of grabs them. They say well you know this I can relate
to it's the world that I live in just stretched a little bit the connection is not broken the
economics and the politics have evolved from what I read in the papers I can still see the connections
and it could be the world my kids go up in and I like it. Hogan's latest novel Voyage from
yesteryear is further in the future than his other books in the field of action is much broader
but it's typically Hogan and his credibility. If you haven't been exposed to James P. Hogan's brand
of science fiction you're missing something. This has been the science fiction radio show
production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa
College in Odessa, Texas.